                                 CS 61B Lab 10
                                April 3-4, 2014

Goal:  to give you experience with general trees and encapsulation.  The trees
we use in this lab use the SibTree data structure described in Lecture 24
(which you should review now), and are encapsulated in the same manner as the
Homework 5 lists (whose design was the subject of Lecture 19).  SibTrees are
designed to ensure that the SibTree and SibTreeNode invariants (which are
written out in their respective files) cannot be violated.

Please make sure you have a partner for this lab.

Copy the Lab 10 directory by doing the following, starting from your home
directory.

  cp -r ~cs61b/lab/lab10 .

All the code is in the tree package.  You can compile it from your lab10
directory with "javac -g tree/*.java".  Extensive test code is provided and
can be run with "java tree.SibTree".

Familiarize yourself with the fields and methods of the SibTree and SibTreeNode
classes.  SibTree has two fields, one inherited from the Tree abstract class.

  int size;                 // The number of SibTreeNodes in the SibTree.
  SibTreeNode root;         // The node that serves as the root of the tree.

SibTreeNode has six fields, two inherited from the TreeNode abstract class.

  Object item;              // Item stored at this SibTreeNode.
  boolean valid;            // True if and only if this is a valid node.
  SibTree myTree;           // The SibTree that contains this node.
  SibTreeNode parent;       // This node's parent.
  SibTreeNode firstChild;   // This node's first (leftmost) child.
  SibTreeNode nextSibling;  // This node's next sibling to the right.

As with the Homework 5 lists, the Tree class defines certain nodes to be
invalid.  In constrast to the Homework 5 lists, valid and invalid nodes are
distinguished solely through the state of the "valid" field.  When a TreeNode
is removed from a tree, it becomes invalid.  Methods like parent(), child(),
and nextSibling() return an invalid node (never null!) if no such node exists.
You may create an invalid node by calling the zero-parameter SibTreeNode()
constructor.  You may test whether a node n is valid by calling
n.isValidNode().

Every valid SibTreeNode is in some tree, specified by the "myTree" field.

Your task is to implement the parent(), insertChild(), and removeLeaf() methods
of the SibTreeNode class.  After you write each one, you may use the test code
to check your progress.

Part I:  Accessing a Node's Parent (1 point)
--------------------------------------------
Fill in the body of the parent() method in SibTreeNode.java.  parent() returns
the SibTreeNode that is the parent of "this" SibTreeNode.  If "this" node is
the root, return an invalid node.

Throw an InvalidNodeException if "this" node is not valid.

Part II:  Inserting New Children (3 points)
-------------------------------------------
Fill in the body of insertChild().  insertChild() takes two parameters:  an
item and an integer c.  Create a new child that is the cth child (from the
left) of "this" node, and references the item indicated.  Existing children
numbered c or higher are shifted one place to the right to accommodate.  If
c < 1, act as if c is 1.  If "this" node has fewer than c children, the new
node is the last sibling.

Don't forget that SibTrees have a "size" field that needs to be updated.

Throw an InvalidNodeException if "this" node is not valid.

BONUS Part III:  Removing a Leaf (1 bonus point)
------------------------------------------------
Fill in the body of removeLeaf(), which removes "this" node from the tree if it
is a leaf, and does nothing if it is not a leaf.  Upon completion, "this" node
should be invalid.

As always, throw an InvalidNodeException if "this" node is not valid.

Check-off
---------
Show your TA or Lab Assistant the code you have written, and run the test
program.  You'll receive points for each part that runs without printing any
error messages.  You can receive up to 5 points out of 4.

(Note to TAs:  be stringent about the bonus point, and don't give extra time.)
